📊 Is data "data"? 📊

At a breakfast at Google's LAX campus about ten years ago, I was discussing the crowdsourcing work of our team with some colleagues. We were two linguists and a quantitative psychologist working on the kinds of projects that companies like scale.ai would eventually make gobs of money doing for other companies. The data that we were collecting was all about ads, yet the three of us had no background in advertising whatsoever. The consensus was that "data is data". We didn't necessarily need to have extensive experience with advertising or individual partner teams' use cases to do our work.

For the past 9 months, I have been working with lots of different collaborators on different kinds of projects. The people that I collaborate with have titles like AI scientists, faculty member at a research hospital, professor, graduate student, and startup founder. Projects address AI safety, both from a methodological standpoint and in real-world contexts like cancer survivorship care, red-teaming, language patterns in AI output vs. human writing, among others. I have found that the deeper the collaboration, the more important it is to understand the culture of the domain that a research partner works in. Medical AI, for example, is concerned with a very different set of issues than generic "AI safety". Data is data only works up to a certain point.

With that being said, there are contexts in which the "data is data" mindset can be helpful. In the second week of XCS224N, Stanford's NLP with Deep Learning course, we did a deep dive on the 2013 paper that introduced Word2Vec, a computational implementation of the famous British linguist J.R. Firth's "you shall know a word by the company that it keeps". In 2018, this insight showed up in chemistry. Mol2Vec treats molecules the way Word2Vec treats sentences: break a molecule into its substructures, treat each one as a "word," and learn embeddings from 19.9 million compounds. The result is a 300-dimensional vector for any molecule, a compressed representation of its chemical "meaning." In a recent interview process, I used mol2vec (and XGBoost) to predict the glass transition temperature (Tg) of polymers from string representations of their structures known as "SMILES". On a held-out test set, the trained model achieved an R² of 0.78.
I have no background in chemistry or materials science. But the paradigm of "find the words, learn the grammar, let the geometry of the embedding space do the work" appears to have some juice in polymer informatics, just like in natural language processing. Sometimes data really is data.

Full notebook and code: https://github.com/cmstewart/predicting_tg_values_from_SMILES_strings
